---
title: ImageJ
layout: post
categories: [Bioinformatics]
tags: [ImageJ, Plot]
image: /figure2016
---

{% include JB/setup %}

# ImageJ introduction

[ImageJ](https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/index.html) is a public domain Java image processing program inspired by NIH Image for the Macintosh. It runs, either as an online applet or as a downloadable application, on any computer with a Java 1.4 or later virtual machine. Downloadable distributions are available for Windows, Mac OS, Mac OS X and Linux.   

# DPI

By default, the DPI in the JPEG header is set to 72. For a higher value, use a unit of "inch" in the **Analyze** -> **Set Scale** dialog (requires v1.40 or later). For example, setting "**Distance in Pixels**" to 300, "**Known Distance**" to 1 and "**Unit of Length**" to "**inch**" will set the DPI to 300.   

只能保存为tif格式。另存为png格式dpi会变成72.   
Note that ImageJ does not read or write the resolution for JPG files, only that of TIFFs.    

# Color Spaces 

- Grayscale: The simplest color representation has no color at all, just black, white, and shades of gray.   
- RGB: red, green, and blue. RGB is an additive color model — the desired color is created by adding together different amounts of red, green, and blue light.   
- CMYK: Another way to add color to an image is to subtract it. In subtractive color models, each channel represents a pigment absorbing a certain color. CMYK color represents a common color printing process, with **cyan**, **magenta**, **yellow**, and **black** inks (the K stands for "key").    

Use this submenu to determine the type of the active image or to convert it to another type.       

- 8-bit. Converts to 8-bit grayscale. 
- 8-bit Color. Converts to 8-bit indexed color using Heckbert's median-cut color quantization algorithm.    
- RGB Color. Converts to 32-bit RGB color.   

**Image** -> **Type** -> **8-bit** will convert color to grayscale.     

# Crop

Image -> Crop   


